Design Document: “Grid Game”

Basic Edition

---

HIGH CONCEPT

Two players send units across a grid to attack each other.
The goal is to kill the opposing player’s units.

DESCRIPTION

As the game begins, two players decide on a size for the game board/grid.
Once selected, two sets of units are placed on their end of the grid, 
each set under one player’s control. Players then take turns moving their units around the grid.
As units are coordinated around the grid, players attempt to kill all enemy units. 
A player wins when all of the opposing player’s units have been eliminated.

GRID

The game will be played on a square grid ranging in size from 16x16 to 32x32 squares. 
Two arrays will hold values aligned to the X and Y values across the grid. 
Units controlled by the player will each hold a specific X and Y position on the grid using arrays.

Grid will keep track of every unit's position.  Every space should know if it's occupied.
Grid should know it's boundaries.  No units can exist outside boundaries.
When a unit moves it has to ask the grid if it's a valid movement.
When a unit attacks, it asks grid if another unit is within attack range.
When a unit dies, it lays down and blocks that space.  Alies can step over dead bodies.


TILE

Holds state of space on map (occupied, blocked, etc.)
Holds the sprite image of the space.


UNITS

Every unit has certain specific traits:
Position, Move Distance, Locked, Max Health, Current Health,
Attack Damage, Ability Value, Special Ability, Image, and Allegiance

A unit’s Position is equal to its X and Y values in the array that represents the grid. 
Move Distance resembles the maximum number of spaces a unit can move across the grid per turn.
If unit is locked, it cannot move or attack this turn.
A unit’s Max Health displays the highest value its Current Health can reach. 
A unit's Current Health displays how much damage it can take before it dies.
Attack Damage represents how much damage a unit will deal to enemy units per attack. 
Ability Value is a number that will apply to a unit's Apecial Ability in unique ways.
A Special Ability is an alternative to attacking that will be unique to each unit type.
Every unit will have an Image in the form of a sprite that both players will see.
Allegiance will determine which team the unit is on.
Units of the same allegiance are known as allies, while all other units are enemies.


UNIT TYPES

> Linebacker
- Move Distance: Medium
- Max Health: High
- Attack Damage: Low
- Special: Bubble Block - Negate the next incoming attack.

> Paintballer
- Move Distance: Low
- Max Health: Medium
- Attack Damage: High
- Special: Paint Bomb - Ranged attack that can cross occupied spaces.

> Artist
- Move Distance: Medium
- Max Health: Medium
- Attack Damage: Medium
- Special: Fresh Paint - Return health to self or allies.

> Prankster
- Move Distance: High
- Max Health: Low
- Attack Damage: Medium
- Speical: Gum Trap - Convert a space into a trap that locks the next enemy to cross it.


GAME MANAGER

Keeps track of player turns, how many units are on each team.
Two arrays, one for each player.
If an array is empty, that player loses.
Tells the units when a turn starts.

PLAYER TURNS

When a player’s turn begins, he may select one of his units.

Selecting a unit begins the first of two phases: Moving. 
The unit can be moved a distance up to or equal to its Move Distance trait. 
This is done by allowing the player to move the unit across its X or Y axis by one point at a time. 
Each time a unit tries to move to a new space on the grid, the game checks if the grid is occupied. 
If it is, the unit will not move; if it is empty, the unit moves. 
After moving, if the unit hasn’t moved its full Move Distance value, it may move again. 
The player can end a unit’s moving phase early by selecting the space where it is already standing. 
When a unit’s moving phase ends, the player has the option to either commit to the movement 
or return the unit to its original space and restart the moving phase.

Once a unit’s moving phase has ended, it begins its action phase. 
During the unit’s action phase, the player can select whether the unit will
attack, use its special ability, or skip this phase.
> Attack:
The player selects any space on the grid within one X and/or Y position of the unit. 
Once a space is selected, the the unit attacks, dealing its Attack Damage
against the Current Health of any enemy unit occupying the same space.
> Special Ability:
>> Linebacker, Bubble Block:
The Linebacker enters a blocking state, and will negate a number of incoming attacks
equal to its Ability Value before the player's next turn.
>> Paintballer, Gum Bomb:
The player selects any space on the grid within three X and/or Y positions of the Paintballer.
Once a space is selected, the Paintballer uses its ability, dealing its Ability Value
against the Current Health of any enemy unit occupying the same space.
>> Artist, Fresh Paint:
The player selects any space on the grid within one X and/or Y position of the Artist.
Once a space is selected, the Artist uses its ability, adding its Ability Value
to the Current Health of any ally unit occyping the same space.
(Note, this Special Ability can be used on the Artist itself.)
>> Prankster, Gum Trap:
The player selects any space on the grid within one X and/or Y position of the Prankster.
Once a space is selected, the game will mark the space as Trapped.
If at any point during an enemy unit's movement phase, its position is equal to a Trapped space, 
the unit's remaining movement phase is ended and its action phase is skipped.
A space can remain trapped for the duration of the game, but the Trapper can only have
a number of traps placed equal to his Ability Value at a time.
> Skip:
The unit takes no further actions.
After taking any of the three optional actions, the unit’s action phase ends.
If, at any point during a unit's action phase, an enemy unit’s Current Health is reduced to zero or lower,
the enemy unit dies and locks its position on the grid.

This completes the selected unit’s phases, and the unit is then locked for the rest of the player’s turn. 
The player is free to select another unit and repeat the process. 
Once all of a player's units have been locked, the player’s turn ends.
